The President:  Well, thank
you all for being here.
We are doing a lot of things,
a lot of things are happening.
Attorney General Jeff Sessions.
Secretary Alex Azar,
who's really setting
the world on fire now
with your lowering
of prescription drug prices
and a lot of other
things you're doing,
and we appreciate it very much.
A lot of people are seeing it,
already, what's happening.
And especially the lowering
of the price of healthcare --
we see what's going on there.
It's going to be a tremendous
reduction in healthcare
pricing because of what
we're all doing together.
So, great going, Alex.
And Secretary Betsy DeVos
for joining us.
Today, we're here with state
and local leaders,
law enforcement officers,
and educations
officials to discuss
how we can make
our schools safe
and our communities secure.
And no better time to
discuss it than right now.
And I think we're making
a lot of progress,
and I can tell you there's
a tremendous feeling
that we want to
get something done.
And we're leading
that feeling, I hope.
But there's a great feeling,
including at the NRA,
including with
Republican senators
and, hopefully, Democrat
senators and congressmen.
I want to thank Curtis Hill for
being here, attorney general.
I also want to thank a really
tremendous attorney general --
that's Pam Bondi,
from Florida -- for being here.
Thank you, Pam, very much,
great job you've done there.
Yesterday, I met with survivors
of Parkland shooting.
The Parkland shooting
is just horrible.
So bad for so many people
and so bad for our country.
Families who have lost their
children in school shootings
and local community members
of Washington, D.C.
who want to make sure that
every child is safe at school.
We're having a lot of
problems in Washington, D.C.
I listened to their
heartbreaking stories.
I asked them for their ideas,
and pledged to them
that we will take action,
unlike, for many years,
where people sitting in my
position did not take action.
They didn't take proper action.
They took no action at all,
we're going to take action.
Today we want to hear from you
on how we can improve physical
security in our schools,
tackle the issue
of mental health,
which is a very big issue.
This person that was caught
after having killed
so many people -- 17 --
and badly injuring
so many others --
people don't talk
about the injured,
and they have to go through
life with that horrible,
horrible situation that
they were put in unnecessarily.
People don't talk about that,
the people that are so badly --
I visited them in the hospital,
in Broward County.
And these are injuries
like people wouldn't believe.
And we want to ensure that,
when we see warning signs,
we act quickly.
When we have somebody
that's mentally unstable,
like this guy that was a sicko,
and there were a lot
of warning signs.
A lot of people
were calling, saying,
hey, he's going
to do something bad.
People have to act.
As I said last week,
we must work together
to create a culture of
our country that cherishes life
and forces real
human connections.
We're also working to reduce
violent crime in America
and to make
our communities places
that can be totally safe
for our children,
for our families.
Under my administration,
gun prosecutions have
increased very significantly.
The Attorney General is very,
very much after that.
And we're also after the gangs.
The gangs have been incredible.
MS-13 -- I see where
a couple of commentators
that are lightweights said,
Oh, MS-13,
who talks about that?
That's all he talked
about on Fox.
No, that's not
talked about on Fox.
That's talked about
in communities
where they're killing people,
not necessarily with guns --
because that's not painful
enough, this is what they think.
They want to do it
more painfully
and they want to do it slowly.
So, they cut them up
with knives.
They don't use guns;
they use knives,
because they want it to be
a long, painful death
to people that had
no idea this was coming.
And we're getting them out
by the thousands,
putting them in jail
and we're getting them out
by the thousands.
And our people from ICE
and our Border Patrol
people are much tougher
than they are.
That's the only thing
they understand,
by the way, is toughness,
they don't understand niceness.
They understand toughness,
and our people are much tougher.
They go in there,
they grab them by the neck.
There's no games being played.
And I let them know
that's what we want.
We need tougher
people than they are,
and our people are
a lot tougher than they are.
So, we're working on getting
violent offenders off the streets
and guns out of the hands
of the dangerous criminals.
There's nothing more important
than protecting our children.
We had a, really,
incredible meeting yesterday
with some of the families
that have suffered so greatly,
in different places,
not only in Florida --
as you know, Columbine.
And it was a very sad situation.
But I will tell you,
background checks --
I called many senators
last night,
many congressmen,
and Jeff and Pam
and everybody in this room.
I can tell you, Curtis, they're
into doing background checks
that they wouldn't be thinking
about maybe two weeks ago.
We're going to do strong
background checks.
We're going to work on getting
the age up to 21 instead of 18.
We're getting rid
of the bump stocks.
And we're going to be focusing
very strongly on mental health,
because here's a case
of mental health.
Part of the problem is we used
to have mental institutions.
And I said this yesterday --
where you had
a mental institution
where you take a sicko,
like this guy --
he was a sick guy,
so many sides --
and you bring him to
a mental health institution.
Those institutions
are largely closed
because communities
didn't want them.
Communities didn't want
to spend the money for them.
So, you don't have
any intermediate ground.
You can't put them in jail
because he hadn't
done anything yet,
but you know he's
going to do something.
So, we're going to be
talking seriously
about opening mental health
institutions again.
In some cases, reopening.
I can tell you, in New York,
the governors in New York
did a very, very bad thing
when they closed
our mental institutions,
so many of them.
You have these people
living on the streets.
And I can say that, in many
cases throughout the country,
they're very dangerous.
They shouldn't be there.
So, we're going to be talking
about mental institutions.
And when you have
some person like this,
you can bring them into
a mental institution
and they can see
what they can do.
But we got to get them
out of our communities.
So, with that being said,
I'd like to ask
the very talented people
around this table
to just introduce
themselves quickly
and say a few words.
And maybe we can start
off with Pam Bondi.
Pam, thank you.
Ms. Bondi: Thanks, Mr. President.
I'm Pam Bondi, Attorney
General of Florida.
And, Mayor, thank you.
I know you're going
through a lot now.
President, she was there
that night with me.
I think you were there with me
until 3:30 in the morning
when all these families
were being notified,
and it was horrific.
So, I know you've been through
a lot, so thank you so much.
The President:  She
did a great job.
Ms. Bondi: I have a couple
issues that I'll wait --
or do you want to
talk about them now?
The President:  Talk about them.
You can talk.
Ms. Bondi:  Well, one it
addresses some of the things
you said in Florida.
It's called the Baker Act, but
it's our civil commitment act.
And it's weak, and it's
about 1,000 pages long.
And I've had my solicitor
general on it for four days,
three days now, working on it,
we're rewriting it --
along with
Governor Scott, who's --
you're going to meet with him
and he's going to give you
a ton of good information.
The President:  Good.
Ms. Bondi: We've been
rewriting it,
and we are going
to bring in something
called the Gun Violence
Restraining Order.
So, if someone is
civilly committed --
and typically, you can hold them
for up to 72 hours,
but people are getting out
within 24 hours,
the majority of them.
So, what we want to do
is let law enforcement
come in and take the guns.
The President:  Good.
Ms. Bondi: They are a danger
to themselves or others --
The President: which
you can't do right now.
Ms. Bondi:  Well,
without being adjudicated.
So, because they're
a danger to themselves --
The President:  You want them
to take the guns
and not go through
six months of legal trials
and everything else,
which is a problem.
Ms. Bondi: Exactly.
The President: Okay.
Ms. Bondi:  But we also have
to give the mentally ill
the due process in which
they deserve, President.
So, what we're doing
is they're going to be able
to take the guns
when they're taken into
custody -- or into the hospital.
And then, when they're released,
within 24 hours
or 72 hours later --
typically, it's 24 hours --
but law enforcement will have
72 hours to determine
whether they should
give those guns back,
or they can go to a judge
and say, "Your Honor,
please keep these guns.
We feel this person is still
a danger to himself or others,
whether they're in
or out of custody.
The President:  So, this would
not have worked the way
it's currently constituted.
This would not have
worked with Cruz
as it's currently constituted.
Ms. Bondi: As it's currently
written.
The President: So,
you're going to make changes?
Ms. Bondi: We're going
to make changes.
And one other thing we're doing
about the reporting,
President, which is --
this is a big issue --
we need a clearinghouse.
And that's what we've
all been discussing.
And we have created,
and several of my counterparts
have done it around the country,
but we're the biggest state
doing it -- it's an app.
Because kids now
are on social media.
And there were so many
warning signs on Snapchat,
on Twitter, on Instagram.
And they were posting --
they were sending them
to all different sources.
And we're going to have --
and we just got it in written
in our House and Senate budget;
it will cost at least half
a million dollars a year
to fund this.
But what it does -- kids --
and so I met with 10 students,
and they loved it.
And they said
I'm empowering them.
Three of them are
my graphic designers.
The President:  Good.
Ms. Bondi: They're going
to design the icon.
Some are going to name it;
they're helping us with it.
But it will cost probably about
$100,000 maximum to develop.
That's all in our budget.
So what kids can do now --
they can automatically
send something that says,
I'm going to buy a gun,
just like Cruz was doing.
I'm going to do this.
And one of the girls who I met
with -- one of the students --
told me he had been doing
this since middle school,
he had bullied her,
and she reported it.
So, it will all --
they can instantly --
and they can do it
with anonymity.
The President:  Good.
Ms. Bondi:  Put it in this app.
It will go in the app,
and it will go through
one clearinghouse
with state law enforcement
in Florida.
The President:  Well,
you mentioned the Internet.
We have to look at the Internet
because a lot of bad
things are happening
to young kids and young minds,
and their minds
are being formed.
And we have to do
something about
maybe what they're seeing
and how they're seeing it.
And also, video games.
I'm hearing more and more people
say the level of violence
on video games
is really shaping young
people's thoughts.
And then you go the further
step, and that's the movies.
You see these movies,
they're so violent.
And yet a kid is able to see
the movie if sex isn't involved,
but killing is involved,
and maybe they have to put
a rating system for that.
And, you know, you get into
a whole very complicated,
very big deal.
But the fact is that
you are having movies
come out that are so violent,
with the killing
and everything else,
that maybe that's another thing
we're going to have to discuss.
And a lot of people
are saying it,
you have these movies
today where you can go
and have a child see the movie,
and yet it's so violent
and so disgusting.
So, we may have to
talk about that also.
Well, thank you very much, Pam.
Thank you very much. Jeff?
Attorney General Sessions:  Mr.
President, my schoolteacher wife
watched your meeting yesterday.
She was very moved by it.
And I think it has touched
people all over the country.
The President: Thank you,
thank you, thank you.
Attorney General Sessions:  And
I salute you for that.
And I won't talk now; others
have got things they'll say.
I just will say that
we believe we can do better.
We believe that
some of the things
that Attorney General Bondi
is talking about can work.
We've done a lot of research
in this country
over the last several years.
We need to go back
and act on it.
It's one thing to research,
as you indicated.
It's another thing
to do something about it.
The President: We're
going to act, that's right.
Attorney General Sessions:  And
we think we can help you
develop the kind of policies
that will make America safer.
The President: Good, thank you.
And you're doing a great job
with the gangs.
The gangs are such a problem.
You know, we talk
about child safety.
The kids walk home, and they
meet one of these gangs.
And these are absolute animals.
These aren't human beings;
these are animals.
And it's the torture --
the level of torture.
In this country,
who would ever believe
a thing like this could happen?
But we're literally getting
MS-13 out by the thousands.
But they come in --
these are smart, they're smart.
They actually have franchises
going to Los Angeles.
We're getting no help
from the state of California.
I mean, frankly, if I wanted to
pull our people from California,
you would have a crying mess
like you've never seen
in California.
All I'd have to do is say,
ICE and Border Patrol,
let California alone.
You'd be inundated --
you would see crime like nobody
has ever seen crime
in this country.
And yet we get no help
from the state of California.
They are doing
a lousy management job.
They have the highest
taxes in the nation,
and they don't know
what's happening out there.
Frankly, it's a disgrace --
the sanctuary city situation,
the protection of these
horrible criminals --
you know because
you're working on it.
And the protection
of these horrible criminals
in California,
and other places,
but in California.
That if we ever pulled our ICE
out and we ever said,
Hey, let California alone.
Let them figure it out
for themselves,
in two months they'd be
begging for us to come back.
They would be begging.
And you know what?
I'm thinking about doing it.
Yes, sir. Go ahead.
Sheriff McDonald:  Yes, sir,
Charles McDonald.
Mr. President,
it's a pleasure to be here.
I thank you from the bottom
of my heart for your support,
certainly from all the sheriffs
in North Carolina,
if not, all of law enforcement.
The President:  Congressman
Meadows is a big fan of yours,
that I can tell you. You know
who I'm talking about, right?
Sheriff McDonald: Well, I'm a
big fan of his, thank you, sir.
The President: Good man.
Sheriff McDonald: I've been
very impressed, Mr. President,
with a lot of the ideas
I've heard just since --
before you came in, actually.
And I do think mental health
is a serious issue
that's affecting us
across the nation.
I know it is in North Carolina.
I appreciate your courage, sir,
to talk about the fact
that I do think
there is a place
where properly trained people
in certain areas as well --
think multi-layered,
like an onion.
Security has got
a lot of facets.
And I believe that
you've got, certainly,
the courage and the leadership
to bring all of this together.
I know there's a lot of
good ideas out there.
I think they all need
to be listened to.
But it's going to take a lot of
courage on the part of leaders,
I think, in this nation,
to bring the community together,
to help them do the things
that that they really want
to do in their heart,
but maybe haven't had
the courage to do yet.
Thank you, sir.
The President:  Thank you,
Sheriff.
It's going to take a lot of
political courage, you're right.
Sheriff McDonald:  Yes, sir.
The President:  A lot of
political courage.
Some of it won't be
politically correct.
But time for political
correctness is over.
We have to get
this problem solved.
So, you're right about that.
Thank you, Sheriff. Yes, sir.
Mr. Sanders:  Mr. President,
Rick Sanders,
Commissioner of
the Kentucky State Police.
And much like Florida,
we went through this last month.
We had a school shooting at
Marshall County High School.
And we're going to hear a lot
about what we can do
in the future
to help protect our children.
What I'm concerned with is,
what are we going to do now
to protect our children?
The President: Right.
Mr. Sanders: And there's going
to be a lot of debate,
but I applaud you, sir,
for having the courage
to bring together
law enforcement,
mental health professionals
and educators,
all sitting around
this table to decide
together what we need to do.
I'm real curious to hear
what Attorney General Bondi
continues to do in Florida.
I think the gun violence
restraining order
is critically important.
And I also think that we,
in law enforcement,
we need to create a database
in our fusion centers
where can take information
that we have on students
that may be a threat
and put that into a database
so that the FBI can share
with local law enforcement
and state police,
and we all have that information
that we can act upon.
And more importantly,
I think there should be
something coming out of that;
that we did something with it.
And it didn't just lay there,
but we took that information
and we actually acted on that.
And that's something
I'm very interested in pursuing.
The President:  Thank you, Rick.
The federal government
is really going to be
a coordinator
between all of the states
so that you give information
and other states
will have that information.
Otherwise, there's
no way of getting it.
Mr. Sanders:  Yes, sir.
The President: So,
we'll be doing that.
And I have to say, the states
are starting to act --
Florida, as an example;
your state.
A lot of states are starting
to act on their own.
They don't necessarily
need 100 percent
from the federal government.
Federal government
is going to help a lot,
but a lot of states
can do some of the things
that I'm talking
about on their own.
And I really implore
them to do it,
and to do it as quickly
as possible,
as you understand.
Thank you.
Ms. Bondi:  And Governor Scott,
Mr. President.
Wait until you see
what Governor Scott
is about to release in Florida.
The President:  Governor Scott
is a great example.
Ms. Bondi: It's great.
The President: He's going to do
a lot of things.
And, again,
there will be coordination
with the federal government,
but the states can do a lot
of this work on their own
and get it done very quickly.
Paula.
Ms. Stone: Yes,
I'm Paula Stone and I'm
a mental health professional,
although I now work for
the Department of Human Services
in the area of making sure
that mental health services
are provided to
the citizens of Arkansas.
And so I think what you said
about early warning signs
is very important to note,
and access
to appropriate services,
and training educators.
There's a program called
Mental Health First Aid,
where educators can be trained
in how to identify
those early warning signs
and making sure that those
services are easily accessible,
because access is a problem.
If somebody has to leave
the school grounds
and go to a clinic,
wait for an appointment,
then you've lost all that time.
If we can have mental
health professionals
that are located in schools,
co-located with physicians
in places where people
go into the community,
so those people are
identified with those needs
and get those
services very quickly
before it gets to the point of
having some significant needs.
Mental health
professionals also,
for people that have
more significant needs,
can wrap around
the whole families.
Because a lot of times, the
families are asking for help,
but they haven't
gotten that support.
There may be stigma,
there may be access issues.
You want to make sure that
all of those services are there,
readily available,
that there's no stigma
to those services
and that they can have those.
And then, we were
talking down at this end
of the table
a minute ago about then,
when it gets to the point
where somebody is scared,
or somebody gets arrested,
we are starting
crisis stabilization
units in our state.
And other states have used
crisis stabilization units.
And our Governor Hutchinson
has given some funds for us
to start them in our state.
They are units which is
not just mental health;
it's a partnership
between the county,
the mental health
agency in that area,
and the law enforcement.
So, when law enforcement
is trained
with crisis
intervention training,
they can identify people
when they arrest them,
that they have a mental illness,
that they're having
a mental health issue,
instead of taking them to jail,
where they wouldn't
receive that treatment,
or where it would be
very difficult
for them to be screened.
They can take them to the
crisis stabilization units.
They can hold them
there for 72 hours.
The President:  Good.
Ms. Stone:  They can
do screenings,
they can begin treatment,
and then they can make sure
that they get filtered
into the right treatment,
also working with the judiciary
and the law enforcement
officials as a partnership,
a collaboration with them all.
The President:  Thank you,
Paula.
Say hello to the governor.
Ms. Stone:  I will.
The President: He's
a great governor.
Ms. Stone:  He is.
The President: He is, done a great job.
Alex.
Secretary Azar:  Well,
Mr. President, as you know, you,
last year, had identified
serious mental illness
as one of the core
priorities at HHS already.
The President: That's right.
Secretary Azar:  And that
involved funding
and also involved creating
the interdepartmental
coordinating committee
around serious mental illness
to pull all the resources
of federal government
together around these issues.
And I've enjoyed
the discussion
so far this morning with these
experts around some of the areas
of how we're building
our future agenda here
to really tackle these issues
of serious mental illness
around the issues of violence.
One of those areas is education.
What can we do better
to assist educators,
and parents,
and first responders
on dealing with serious
mental illness situations?
Second is, what can we do
around screening
and identification of those at
risk for serious mental illness?
The third is treatment.
Both preventive treatment
for those who are
recently diagnosed,
but also those who are
an imminent risk of danger
to themselves or others.
And that might involve
involuntary issues.
As talked about earlier, how can
we be of assistance there
to get people the care
that they need
to live fruitful
and good lives,
but also be safe?
The fourth is
community engagement.
So often, serious mental illness
is part of being disengaged
and disconnected,
and how can we reconnect people
or keep them connected.
And then finally, it's research
on the next generations
of therapies.
What can we in
the federal government
do to help bring the research
and next-generation therapies
for mental illness
to the table for people?
The President: Right,
that's great, Alex.
That's great,
thank you very much.
The Mayor of Parkland,
Florida has suffered greatly,
seen things that
you never thought
you would ever be
a part of or see.
And I just want
to say, Christine,
on behalf of all of us,
you've done a great job.
Mayor Hunschofsky:  Thank you
so much, Mr. President.
The President: You've been
given a rough hand,
but you have done
a great job, thank you.
Mayor Hunschofsky:  I would
just, first of all,
like to say thank you.
I don't know if you realize how
much it meant to the students
to be able to have a voice
and to be heard by you
and your administration.
That's a very empowering
thing for the students,
and we appreciate it immensely.
The President:  Thank you.
Mayor Hunschofsky:  We
spoke yesterday,
and this roundtable
has been amazing.
I am grateful
to be able to be here.
This didn't just
happen in a vacuum;
there was a whole timeline
that led to this.
And I'm very happy that there's
such a commitment to action
on all the steps that could
have been taken to prevent it:
The beginning of the mental
health portion of it.
The President:  Right.
Mayor Hunschofsky:  The police
portion of it;
if there had been
better communication,
maybe that could
have been acted on.
What's very important
to our residents right now
is the school safety
portion of it:
that someone like that cannot
gain access to these schools,
and that our students
are safe going to school.
And it's very important
that we act on that
as quickly as possibly,
because that is
where the parents
and the students
are afraid right now.
And then, on the end,
how did somebody like
this person get access
to that kind of firearm?
And I think what Pam Bondi
is working on is wonderful.
And thank you so much for
allowing us a seat at the table,
and for really listening
and being committed to action.
I think that makes us
all very hopeful.
The President:  Well, thank you.
And I'm so sorry for
what you've gone through.
I mean, few people
will ever go through
what you've gone through
over the last week,
and we really all appreciate it.
You've done a -- you've been
an incredible mayor
in a time when they need it,
really, right now --
a very incredible mayor.
The amazing thing about
Parkland -- which I know,
because Florida is a special
place that I know very well --
this is probably the last
place in this country
where you'd think a thing
like this could happen.
Mayor Hunschofsky:  We were
the safest city.
The President:  Yeah.
Mayor Hunschofsky: We're one
of the safest cities.
The message is, if it can happen
here, it can happen anywhere.
And it's very important
that we do everything
we can to secure our schools
so that the students
feel safe there
and the parents feel
safe sending them there.
The President:  Yeah.
Mayor Hunschofsky: Thank you,
Mr. President, I appreciate it.
The President: Thank you,
thank you very much, Christine.
Andrew.
Mr. Bremberg:  Well,
Mr. President,
we had a really
great conversation,
and I want to leave more time
for the other participants.
We can brief you
later on more --
The President:  Okay, good.
Mr. Bremberg:  -- of the great
ideas and issues
that these leaders
have talked about --
The President:  Good.
Mr. Bremberg:  --
particularly as you continue
to lead this discussion --
The President: Thank you.
Mr. Bremberg:  -- and as you
prepare for your conversation
with the governors.
The President:  Thank you,
Andrew.
And Kellyanne Conway, though,
I'll have you say --
I think most people
know Kellyanne,
she's become a pretty big star.
What do you think?
Attorney General Sessions:  Big
star.
The President: Pretty big star,
I think the best, right?
Ms. Conway: Thank you, sir,
I don't see it that way.
The President: Would you like
to say something because I know
it's a very important
issue for you, personally.
Ms. Conway: Yes, sir, yes, sir.
Thank you for
yesterday and today.
And the one thing
I would mention,
because we heard it
from the mayor
before you walked in the room,
we heard it from
Mr. Scott yesterday --
whose daughter,
Rachel Joy Scott,
was the first fatality
at Columbine, 19 years ago --
is this lack of connectedness
for our youth.
And some of the social
media outlets
you've mentioned
didn't even exist in 1999.
But it's this lack
of connectedness,
and I think that's a whole
other type of stigma and silence
that needs to be cured
in our society.
We all have a role
to play there;
there's an entire
spectrum of actors.
We should watch our words
and our actions and realize
that there are many different
causes and symptoms
and consequences, obviously.
But at the same time,
if we're focusing on youth,
we need to focus on all youth
and the ability for them
to feel that they are connected.
That is not with respect
to any one individual.
It's just I heard it
very clearly from Mr. Scott
yesterday, very clearly
from the mayor,
and very clearly
from the President of
the United States moments ago.
Thank you very much for being
a leader on this, Mr. President.
I think that you have
a great opportunity
to join with the nation
and help them to heal
and to move forward in a way
that shows not just resilience,
but great resolve,
and not just talk, but action.
We're very grateful that
you're President at this time.
The President: Thank you,
thank you very much, Kellyanne.
Patrick.
Mr. Neville:  Mr. President,
Patrick Neville.
Colorado House Minority Leader,
and also a former
Columbine student
who was there that day.
Thank you for your
leadership on this issue.
You're absolutely right --
I read some of your
comments from last night,
but we have to find a way to let
good people defend our students.
We can't let criminals think
that this is going to be
an easy target
for them to enter their schools
and injure our students.
We have to find a way
to harden those targets
so that our students
aren't sitting ducks.
Furthermore, I think
that we do have
some good programs
to model off of.
The Safe to
Tell program in Colorado
has been wildly successful.
We have similar to what
Pam Bondi was talking about.
It can be used not just
for school violence actions,
but it can also be used
for suicidal ideations
and other things of that nature.
But that said, I think we have
to do it immediately,
but I think we also
need to realize, too,
it's not just about the guns.
My experience is pretty
unique in Columbine
that there was also
two propane tanks
that were supposed to be
a bomb that going to go off.
By the grace of God,
that didn't happen.
But there are other ways
that people can commit
these atrocious acts.
So, I appreciate
your approach on this,
by listening before
just reacting.
The President: Well,
I appreciate what you're saying.
And I've watched you
and read about you,
and you have a great story,
where you came from
and how you --
and you're doing so
fantastically well right now.
But I happen to agree with you.
We have to harden our schools,
not soften them up.
A gun-free zone to a killer,
or somebody that
wants to be a killer,
that's like going in
for the ice cream.
That's like,
Here I am, take me.
We have to get smart
on gun-free zones.
When they see it says,
This is a gun-free zone,
that means that nobody
has a gun except them;
nobody is going to be shooting
bullets in the other direction.
And they see that as
such a beautiful target.
They live for gun-free zones.
And, I mean, frankly,
you have teachers
that are Marines for 20 years,
and they retire,
they become a teacher.
And they're Army, Navy,
Air Force, they're Coast Guard,
they're people that have
won shooting contests.
And they're for whatever --
this is what they do.
They know guns,
they understand guns.
And I, frankly, have been
reading a lot about it.
And I think when
you allow a person
who has been in the Marines
for 20 years,
who's done nothing
but handle guns
and handle them
safely and well --
because you can't just
give a teacher a gun.
One of the fake
news networks, CNN,
last night was saying
I want teachers to have guns.
I don't want teachers
to have guns.
I want certain
highly adept people,
people that understand
weaponry, guns --
if they really have
that aptitude.
Because not everybody
has an aptitude for a gun.
But if they have the aptitude,
I think a concealed permit
for --
having teachers
and letting people know
that there are people
in the building with a gun --
you won't have -- in my opinion,
you won't have these shootings.
Because these people
are cowards.
They're not going to
walk into a school
if 20 percent of
the teachers have guns.
It may be 10 percent,
or it may be 40 percent.
And what I would recommend doing
is the people that do carry,
we give them a bonus.
We give them
a little bit of a bonus.
Frankly, they'd feel more
comfortable having a gun anyway.
But you give them
a little bit of a bonus.
So, practically for free,
you have now made the school
into a hardened target.
For instance, if the coaches,
who I guarantee had plenty
of experience with weapons --
if they had guns --
you need to hard,
because no matter what you do
to keep them gun-free,
they'll be able to get in there,
and they'll crawl through the
back of a window or something.
And you're going to
have everybody, again,
without any protection.
So, I know where
you stand on it.
You want a hardened school,
and I want
a hardened school, too.
I want to know that
if they get in there,
they're not going to be long.
Because it's going to take
10 minutes for the police
to get there.
The police do an incredible
job in getting there.
I guess it averages
about eight minutes,
but the shootings
average three minutes.
And that's tremendous
destruction and death.
So, I would like to see true
people with great talent at guns
and being adept at guns,
of which there's only
a percentage of people.
But whatever that percentage may
be, it's a substantial number.
Because you can't hire
enough security guards.
You can't hire --
I mean, the school --
your school, as an example,
Christine, you would have --
you'd need 100,
150 security guards.
That is a very big school
with a tremendous floor area.
You can't have that many --
who wants that
many security guards
standing all over the place,
loaded up with guns?
But you could have concealed
on the teachers.
They wouldn't know --
the people --
nobody would know who they are.
And it is a tremendous threat.
And, by the way,
instead of advertising,
This school has no guns.
We are gun-free,
you let the people
know the opposite.
Nobody is going to attack
that school, believe me.
Because they're cowards.
They don't want to be shot at.
And they're going to be shot at.
So, not everybody agrees with us
-- I know how you stand --
and a lot of people
do agree with us.
But I think we need
hardened sites.
We need to let people know:
You come into our schools,
you're going to be dead,
and it's going to be fast.
And unless you do that,
you're going to always
have this problem.
You can talk about
your gun-free zones.
We had a case three years ago
at a military base
where five Marines,
I believe, three of whom
were world-class shots
and experts at guns,
they were told it was
a gun-free area --
within a military base,
if you can believe that.
If we can't trust our military,
who are we going to trust?
You know what I'm saying. Five.
They were putting away --
they put away their guns.
Their guns were in a different
section, totally gun-free.
Their guns were
250 yards away from them
where they had to store them.
And they went in for lunch,
and a wacko came in
and shot the five of them.
He wouldn't have
lasted for one --
three of these people
were world-class marksmen.
He wouldn't have lasted
for a second.
But they stood there;
there was nothing they could do.
All five were killed, you know
the instance I'm talking about.
That was in a gun-free zone
on a military base.
Well, a school is,
frankly, no different.
I want my schools protected just
like my banks are protected,
just like everything else.
And I get a kick -- I was
watching a politician, weak,
ineffective politician
last night --
I'd tell you a name, but I don't
want to embarrass anybody --
and he was talking about
no guns, no this, no that.
And yet, he's surrounded
by three guys carrying guns.
I said,  Well, when are they
going to give up their guns?
They're not going to
give up their guns.
But he wants everybody else
to have no guns.
And you have plenty of them.
So, we have to harden our sites.
We have to be very careful.
And these people,
as adept as they may --
they have to go to training,
I would say, every six months
or every year.
They have to have a fairly --
really, a rigorous course
in what they're doing.
And they should be
paid extra money.
Those teachers should
be paid extra money.
So, they get a bonus, and they'd
love getting that bonus, too.
And it would be much less
expensive than the guards.
It wouldn't look bad,
you know, if you have guards,
it looks like you have an armed
camp that would look terrible.
Because people are telling me,
we're going to put a lot
of security guards
in the buildings.
Will look terrible.
And it would be
much more effective.
But I'll tell you what, if you
harden these sites in that way,
or some other way
in a similar fashion --
not only teachers;
coaches, it could be
other people
that work in the building --
if you harden the sites,
you're not going
to have this problem,
because these guys
who lack courage
will never go
into those schools.
Those schools are
going to be safe.
But when you say a school
is gun-free --
it's got no guns,
no nothing, it's gun-free --
boy, they start --
that's what they want to hear.
So, I agree with you, Patrick.
Strongly agree with you.
Mr. Kittle:  Fred Kittle
from Bartow County schools
in Bartow County, Georgia.
First, so my mom
doesn't whoop me,
thank you for March 29th --
for the veterans.
She is a Vietnam widow,
and my uncle
is a wounded veteran,
former police chief in (inaudible) City.
What we're doing in our --
I got to thank
Clarence Robie of DNS,
who's -- as you know,
school boards,
we have regular jobs
and do this on the side.
But one of the things that we're
doing in our school system --
and Georgia has given the school
boards a lot of power.
And you are absolutely correct,
there's things local
can already do.
We have the single point
of entry at all of our schools.
You have to be buzzed to get in.
We do have resource officers.
And like you said,
it would take quite a bit --
we have, I believe,
it's seven with our school.
And we have 13,332 students
and 892 teachers there.
But we also work really closely
with our law enforcement.
For example, one of our middle
schools and elementary --
police station is
right around the corner.
And we do pay
the sheriff's department
and local police to help do,
when people are coming
and going, to do the traffic.
But it's also, they're there
and they're present.
So that's also a deterrent.
The President:  How many
are in the school?
Because when you have
a sheriff's department,
they don't have enough people to
really take care of the school.
That's the problem.
Mr. Kittle: You're
absolutely correct.
Now, here's something
the state of Georgia did
after the last shootings
in 2014,
in giving the school
systems the authority.
We're allowed to -- if the
school board so votes on it,
we actually can have
armed employees.
They do have to go through their
safety firearm training and that,
and then our resource officers
also go through a third party --
another party
for training each year.
So, you're absolutely correct.
And there is more
that can be done.
And I think a lot of it, too,
that we need to address, too,
is the heart problem --
the heart issue.
You know, one of the things
that comes out is the family.
We come from a community
where the faith-based community
just wants to help all they can.
When the tornadoes
hit Adairsville,
FEMA thought they were going
to be there a long time.
Very short.
People volunteered,
came out with chainsaws
right when it happened.
And they had to send them back
because they had to get
the power and gas and all that.
But when you're allowed to have
the faith-based, it does a lot.
Right now, they're trying
to figure out
how to help us
in all kinds of ways.
But because of this separation
of church and state,
that was never intended.
So, we would appreciate
if you keep electing --
or not electing --
appointing the justices
like you're doing that follow
the Constitution on their --
The President: We're having
a great success
with the appointment
of justices,
that's true, and judges.
Mr. Kittle: And I need to say
this, so they don't fuss at me:
But we have a lot of people
praying for you
and your administration
there in Georgia.
We have quite
a few churches there.
We have a group called
President's Team.
Once a week,
they pray for you all.
The President:  Thank you.
Mr. Kittle: They're praying
for you and your community.
I know that may sound --
with the devastation,
I can't imagine.
I've got six kids, and I can't
imagine losing any of those.
In fact, watching
what you had --
and I love how you're having
everybody discuss and talk,
and then a solution.
You're solving things that we
hear politicians for 30 years,
and you're doing it
within a year.
And we really appreciate it.
And we've, kind of, taken
your motto, "Just do your job."
And that just
works phenomenally.
Because when it's
one person responsible,
then we know where
it comes down on.
The President:  Well, I want
the politicians to watch.
Like yesterday,
very importantly, they watched,
and a lot of them saw that.
And they saw the
devastation that's caused.
And you know, some of them
maybe don't know
if they don't get to see.
I mean, I was
with those families,
and those families
are devastated.
And I want the politicians
to see that
because they have
to pass legislation.
They have to do things.
And I'm the biggest believer
of the Second Amendment
that there is.
Okay? I am the biggest.
But I'll tell you what, I spoke
with the NRA -- the top people.
And I spoke, and they
gave me tremendous support,
and -- tremendous.
I think I had their earliest --
I was probably
the earliest one, Kellyanne,
from what I hear, ever.
You know, they endorsed me
at the absolute earliest point
that you could,
and I'm a believer.
But I spoke to them,
and they're ready to do things.
They want to do things.
You know, they're good people,
they're patriots.
They love this country.
But the NRA is ready
to do things.
And you know,
people like to blame them,
and they do have power
and all of that.
But they want to do --
they want to --
they actually came up
with certain of the rules
and regulations
that we have now.
But we're going to have to
toughen -- I told them,
I said, we're going to
have to toughen them up.
Because it doesn't
make anybody look good,
and most importantly,
I saw the devastation
of these families.
We can't allow that to happen.
But again, we need
a hardened school.
But we want to harden it without
having everybody
standing there with a rifle.
I don't want that either
because that's no good.
That sends a lot of bad signals.
As an example,
I'm watching John Kelly --
General John Kelly.
So, he's a four-star Marine,
he's a tough cookie.
If he was a teacher,
I wouldn't mind him have a gun
because I guarantee he can use
it better than anybody.
There's no security guard
you're going to hire
that's going to handle
a gun better than him.
So, if he's a teacher,
and if other friends of his
from the Marines,
if they're teaching --
or other people like that --
I want them to have a gun.
But more importantly --
almost more importantly,
nobody is going
to attack that school.
Because they know General Kelly
is the history teacher.
He's teaching about
how we win wars, okay?
And he's got a concealed weapon.
But they're going to know
he's got a concealed,
because we tell them
that the bullets are going to be
flying in the other direction.
You're not going to have
these attacks if you do that.
If you're going to continue
with this nonsense
about a gun-free zone --
gun-free, it sounds so good.
It's like -- it sounds so great.
It is such a target
for the killer.
They look for gun-free zones
because, believe it or not,
they don't want to get killed.
Mr. Kittle:  And we are
a soft target,
and so are movie theaters
and that.
The President:  Well, look
at the guy in Florida.
He tried to escape
with the other. Right?
You had a great policeman caught
him in a different community.
But he actually escaped.
He didn't want to get shot.
If he would have known that
he was going to be shot --
because he's a coward --
but he tried to escape.
He did actually escape.
They had a great policeman in a
different community found him.
So, that's what we need.
Mr. Kittle:  One of our board
members did ask me to ask you,
however, when we're looking at
all these solutions --
and we all know
that the kids are precious,
and we need to do
whatever we need to do --
but at the same time,
one of the things
that hurts our systems a lot
is when we come up
with these unfunded mandates.
We'll suddenly have something
that we have to do,
and we don't necessarily
have the money.
So, if it is something
on the federal level,
we would like to make sure
that it's funded
because we've already had to go
to a different block schedule,
and it cost us 30 teachers.
And we don't want to --
The President: You know, this
isn't so much about funding.
This is more about common sense.
I mean, the money
we're talking about --
I mean, what I'm talking about
is going to save money.
Everybody that agrees
on a hard --
they're all talking about
having 50 security guards
standing all over the school,
which is, you know, going to be
very not nice for the students.
I'm talking about something
where they're there anyway,
where they get
a little extra money
because they happen to carry,
where they go for
training every year.
I mean, we're talking
about rules
and regulations
for purchasing.
We're talking about
changing an age, from 18 to 21.
I mean, so they buy
a revolver -- a handgun --
they buy at the age of 21.
And yet, these other weapons
that we talk about --
that some people don't like --
they're allowed
to buy them at 18.
So how does that make sense?
How does that make sense?
So, I say that
it should all be at 21.
But we're not only
talking about money.
We're talking about common
sense, and it's a great thing.
And the NRA will back it.
I really feel very confident
the NRA will back it,
and so will Congress,
and so will the Senate.
Mr. Kittle: I really like
how you're not focused on
just the tool, you're also
focusing on like mental illness
and other issues,
and families --
The President:  No, no,
focus on mental illness.
You got to focus on mental
illness; it's a big factor.
But in addition
to mental illness,
we have to harden our schools,
we have to make sure --
in a way that doesn't
look like they're hardened.
But we have to let the bad guy
know that they are hardened.
There's not going to be news.
And we don't want
to have a secret.
So, you come in here,
you're not going to last long.
You do that, you're not
going to have a problem.
Betsy, thank you.
Secretary DeVos:  Thank you,
Mr. President.
Thank you so much
for your leadership on this.
The session yesterday
was difficult and very moving,
but very important.
I really appreciate
our focus on both protection
but also on prevention.
And I think particularly about
this issue of connectedness,
and I think of all
of our teachers
and what tools can we give them,
what practices that
they can do daily,
weekly, bi-weekly.
I heard a great story about
a teacher, following Columbine,
who now every two weeks
asks her students
to make a list
of five students
that they'd like
to sit by next week
and five students
who might like to sit by them.
And by the simple act,
regularly done,
she is able to detect a pattern,
if there's a child
that is on the outside.
And this is a simple practice
that can be implemented
tomorrow, today.
So, I just really -- my heart
goes to the teachers
who, in some cases,
feel powerless.
But I think we can help them
and empower them with tools --
The President:  Good.
Secretary DeVos:  --
to notice these things.
The President: Thanks, Betsy,
thank you.
Secretary DeVos:  Thanks,
Mr. President.
The President:  Pam.
Ms. Stewart: Mr. President,
I'm Pam Stewart.
I'm the Commissioner
of Education
for the great state of Florida.
The President:  Right.
Ms. Stewart:  And it was
a terrible tragedy.
I appreciate, so much,
your willingness to visit
the victims and their families
and to hear from students
and parents yesterday,
as well as convening
this group today.
The President:  Thank you.
Thank you.
Ms. Stewart:  The Governor
of Florida, Rick Scott,
as you know,
was in Parkland
and has spent
a great deal of time there.
He also asked that we convene
three roundtables,
which we did on Tuesday --
one on public safety,
one of mental health,
and one of school safety.
I moderated the one
on school safety.
We discussed mental health.
We discussed the policies
and practices
that need to be in place.
We discussed the hardening
of the building.
And so many of the issues that
have been brought up came up
when we talked.
Secretary DeVos has just
mentioned one of those,
which is what we would call
Tier 1 social-emotional issues,
where that needs
to be a practice
where we are helping
students feel connected
so that we don't reach
that point of Tier 3 or Tier 4
where we've got to have
the mental health services
to intervene on individuals like that.
Individual practices being in
place: We are required to have
a fire drill in schools
once a month.
We are not required
to have active shooter drills.
And so a practice like that,
where you put something
like that into place --
The President:  But active
shooter drills
is a very negative thing,
I'll be honest with you.
I mean, if I'm a child
and I'm 10 years old,
and they say, we're going to
have an active shooter drill,
I say, "What's that?"
Well, people may come in
and shoot you.
I think that's a very negative
thing to be talking about,
to be honest with you,
I don't like it.
I'd much rather have
a hardened school.
I don't like it.
I wouldn't want to tell my son
that you're going to participate
in an active shooter drill.
And I know some of them
actually call it that.
I think it's crazy. I think
it's very bad for children.
Ms. Stewart:  And I think
calling it something else
is something important.
The student that served
on our committee
felt that it was important
that he and other students
would know what to do
in an emergency of this type
so that they would know
where to go, how to get out.
Things like hardening
the building so that there is,
as the Mayor has said,
one point of entry.
Having plans that are developed
that have minimum standards
are established.
And having those individuals
in our schools
who are ready to respond,
as you had mentioned.
The other issue that did come up
was the ability to interface
agencies together
so that we are able
to work together
and know what one
another are doing,
and to better be able to address
these issues as they arise.
The President:  Good.
Thank you, Pam, very much.
Curtis.
Mr. Hill:  Mr. President,
thank you so much --
The President:  Thank you.
Mr. Hill:  -- for the
opportunity to be here.
And I want to start out
by saying that, as we all know,
this is the freest
nation on Earth,
and whatever measures
we take have got
to be consistent
with the character
of who are as Americans,
first and foremost.
I'd like to make three
points of things
that we're doing in Indiana
and things that we can
do better in Indiana.
And it goes to the discussion
that we had here.
Securing the physical
environment of the school
is an absolute must.
It goes beyond
policies and plans.
We have a school in Indiana,
in Shelby County,
Southwestern High School,
which was participating
in a pilot project,
and it wouldn't surprise you
to know that it was under
the leadership
of your Vice President --
The President:  Good.
Mr. Hill:  --
then-Governor Pence.
Through this program of
innovation and technology
in connection with the
Indiana Sheriff's Association,
the school created
a model for security.
And in the security, not only do
we have bulletproof doors,
bulletproof glass;
we have containment zones.
When the students
are in the classrooms,
the doors are locked
so we don't have to go up
and lock it from the outside.
And, Mayor, we talked
about that earlier.
That was a concern
you had on how that's done.
This is all done
automatically.
The school is wired directly,
securely to the Sheriff's
Department 10 miles away.
So, the Sheriff's Department
can monitor
in real time
what's occurring.
Each teacher has a key fob,
so that when something occurs,
they can communicate
effectively, immediately,
with someone off-site.
And the most --
The President:  Do you have
anybody inside with a gun
that can take on the man
that's right outside the door,
that, by the way, can shoot
right through the steel doors,
as they did in your school?
Those bullets went right through
those steel doors
like they were butter.
Mr. Hill: That's a part
of what's -- that's a part
of what's necessary.
But I can tell you this:
Whatever else they have
are countermeasures --
countermeasures that
can be employed
from the Sheriff's Department
within seconds
to contain the attacker
and, in a sense,
turn the attack on them.
That's a critical piece.
I would invite you
to come to Shelby County --
The President: I just don't
know what that means.
Honestly, I don't know
what that means.
Mr. Hill:  Well, I can tell you
what it means.
When you're in a hallway --
if you have an active
shooter in the hall,
and he's going around
and he's looking for targets,
we've got the doors blocked.
We've got it locked up.
Somebody is monitoring.
And, for example,
they have smoke canisters
that can come in
and blind the shooter,
which detracts him
from his target.
That gives time, as you know,
that critical time when
he's alone looking for targets.
Now's he discombobulated, he
doesn't know where he's going.
The President: Hopefully,
hopefully.
Mr. Hill: Well, that's the
idea, I mean, these are not --
The President: In the meantime,
he's shooting everybody, though.
Mr. Hill:  Well, in this
particular school,
they're locked down.
We need to have those
types of hard products
or hard targets in our schools.
We do need to have secure --
I think, secured
or highly skilled,
highly trained individuals
that would combine
with that to make sure
that if they do get in there,
there is that deterrent.
Another piece that I want
to talk about
is the mental health
aspect in Indiana.
And Pam is working
on this in Florida.
In Indiana, we already have
what we call  red-flag laws.
We have a law in Indiana
that allows police officers
who believe that
someone is dangerous
or who believe that someone --
or have reason to believe that
someone has a mental illness
and is off their medications,
or is otherwise a danger,
to be able to take the guns,
both under a warrant and in some
circumstances without a warrant,
but then to certainly provide
due process for that
particular individual.
What that does, it gets us
past the issue
of the person's mental illness.
We address the taking
of the guns.
We get them in court.
They're allowed to have
their day in court,
but in the meantime, we're able
to cool down this process
and take the guns from someone,
which is exactly
the type of thing
that we're not having
all over the country.
I think there's a handful of
states that have this process.
Indiana has been doing it
for a number of years.
We just issued a public
safety advisory yesterday,
because what we learned
is that many of prosecutors
and our police officers weren't
even aware that we had it.
The President: Yeah, it's good.
Mr. Hill: So, we're making sure
that that's getting out there.
I would suggest
that it be something
that all states adopt
as quickly as possible.
And one last point.
To the extent that
this is about guns,
let it be about
the illicit use of guns
used inappropriately
or in crimes
so that we can do
what we do in Indiana
and that we need
to work on continually,
is to enhance the penalties
for any type of offense
that's used with a firearm.
Let's double down on that.
If you commit a burglary
or robbery with a firearm,
you need to pay
a severe consequence.
The President: Yeah,
thank you very much.
Mr. Hill:  Thank you, sir.
The President:  I want
to thank everybody.
I just want to end by saying --
in listening to some of
these suggestions,
we really do have to have
offensive measures also.
I know people don't like
talking about it,
but we need offensive
as well as defensive.
We have to be totally defensive.
But if we don't have offensive
measures within these schools,
we're just -- you're just
kidding yourselves, folks.
You're just kidding yourselves.
And if the offensive measures
are strong and solid,
you're going to stop
the problem.
You're going
to stop the problem.
Because they're not
coming into that school.
They'll find something
else, unfortunately.
But they're not coming
into that school.
So, I just would like everybody
to think about that
because I hear so many
of these wonderful plans
where you're going to live
in this utopian school
and there's not going
to be any protection,
there's not going
to be any guns,
to be any bullets
flying at the perpetrator --
the animal that wants to destroy
the lives of families
and children.
Unless you're going to have
offensive capability,
you're wasting your time,
you're wasting your time.
And you're going to talk, and it
would be easier to pass --
I'm sure you're having a lot
of trouble in Florida passing
because a lot of people
don't understand it,
or they do understand it,
but it's politically what
they want to believe.
Because I want to end
the problem.
I don't want to have it
where this happens again.
And unless we're going to have
an offensive capability,
it's going to happen again,
and again, and again,
and it's going to be
the same old story.
And people are going to be
sitting
around tables and talking.
I like to get things done.
And to get this done,
we do need defense,
but we also need
offensive capability.
I want to thank everybody.
You're really experts
at what you're doing.
And it's really tremendous
hearing
some of these ideas that a lot
of people haven't heard.
The media is now hearing things
that they haven't heard.
And a lot of people that are
watching on television right now
are hearing things
that they haven't heard.
So, it's a horrible situation.
We're going to get it stopped.
And we're going to stop it
through heart
and through toughness.
It's a combination of through
love and through toughness.
Otherwise it's not
going to happen.
Just not going to happen.
It's not going to stop.
And again, thank you
all very much.
It's a great honor
to be with you.
Thank you all very much.
Thank you.
The Press: Mr. President,
many school teachers
say that they don't
want guns in the classroom.
The Press: Are you willing
to go up against the NRA, sir,
on age limits?
The President:  Thank you
very much.
I don't think I'll be
going up against them.
I really think the NRA
wants to do what's right.
I mean, they're very close
to me. I'm very close to them.
They're very, very great people.
They love this country,
they're patriots.
The NRA wants to do
the right thing.
I have spoken to them often
in the last two days,
and they want to do
the right thing.
They're going to do the right
thing. I have no doubt about it.
The Press: Do you think
you can win that battle, sir?
The President: It's not
a battle.
I think the NRA wants
to do the right thing.
The Press: What do you say
to teachers who say
that they don't want guns
in the classroom?
The President:  These
are experts.
These would be people that
actually would want them.
And it would be
a small percentage,
but it would be a lot of people.
And once you do this,
you will have a situation
where, all of a sudden,
this horrible plague will stop.
Thank you very much, everybody,
thank you.
The Press: (inaudible.)
The Press: Sir, just one more
(inaudible.)
Do you worry about that --
to have a gun?
The President: These
are experts, only experts.
You understand that,
only experts.
That's all we're talking about.
These are people that are
at the highest
level of professionalism.
The Press: Would you give
them money, federally, for that?
The President:  I would, yeah.
For training.
For additional training.